A country torn to pieces. A people divided
into groups, forced to fight their own brothers.
Lives caught in between the claws of two great
ideological enemies. And an army in retreat,
as another advances.
Army Group North becomes trapped in the Courland
Pocket in Latvia. People say that the trap
could have been avoided. People say they should
have evacuated them. And people say that Hitler
is to blame - it was his ‘fortress’ and
‘stand fast’ mentalities that resulted
in the waste of an entire army group in Courland.
His generals call him ‘mad’ for ordering
his men to stand fast and fight to the death
when he has so little manpower. And Courland
- a siege larger than that of Stalingrad - is
a great example of this. Or is it?
How did Army Group North become trapped? Was
this avoidable? Why didn’t they evacuate
them? Who is to blame for this? And why didn’t
the Soviets destroy the pocket? Were they
capable of destroying the pocket? Did they
try to? In this series, we will attempt to
answer all these questions. Filthy detailed.
Super accurate. History. This is BATTLESTORM,
the story for the Courland Pocket 1944 to
45.
In this video series we will look at the Soviet
offensives of 1944 that resulted in the Courland
Pocket, and the six battles in Courland that
took place from October 1944 to May 1945.
Timestamps to various parts of the video,
and links to other related videos (including
my Operation Market Garden and battles in
the North African Campaign series), will be
in the description. Sources, as well as additional
notes, will be in the Pinned Comment of the
comment section below, not in the description
because there’s a character limit. Don’t
forget to subscribe if you haven’t done
so already, and enjoy the video.
It’s hard to escape the conclusion that,
by 1944 and 45, the war was lost for Germany.
The Western Allies had defeated Germany in
the Mediterranean, Italy, the Atlantic, and
had landed in Normandy in June of 1944. The
Germans had failed to gain victory during
Barbarossa in 1941, locking them into a long-attritional
war. In 1942, the Germans had launched Fall
Blau, in a desperate attempt to secure the
Caucasus oil fields, which would provide them
with enough oil to continue the war, whilst
reducing Soviet supplies. This culminated
in the Battle of Stalingrad, which was a crushing
defeat of the German 6th Army. In 1943, the
Wehrmacht was so crippled by oil shortages
that they were forced to launch a limited
operation against the Soviets - no grand Barbarossa
or Fall Blau movements - just a small operation
at Kursk. In this case, they failed to even
break through to the operational depths. The
Soviet counter-offensives in 1943 and early
1944 were not reversible, and, unlike before
Kursk, the Germans were now unable to sufficiently
replace their manpower or equipment losses.
The German Army wasn’t out, but it was certainly
on the backfoot, and there weren’t any obvious
ways now to claw out a victory.
Most people looking at this era of the war
will ask this question - why did Germany keep
fighting? Why didn’t Germany surrender?
Well, there are a few reasons. It was believed
at the time (although it wasn’t true) that
the German Army in World War 1 hadn’t actually
been defeated, but had been stabbed in the
back. Hitler and the vast majority of the
generals in this second war refused to contemplate
the idea of surrendering before being totally
defeated. Therefore, there would be no shameful
capitulation like that this time - they would
fight to the bitter end. Plus, the Allies
and Soviets had agreed on unconditional surrender,
meaning that there would be no negotiations
at all. A surrender would be entirely on their
terms and no doubt disfavorable and humiliating
to the Germans.
The Germans had also committed numerous atrocities
across Europe (especially in the East), resulting
in millions of dead. If they surrendered,
surely the Soviets would take revenge upon
them. So there was no logical reason to give
in.
And, perhaps, not all doors were closed. The
always optimistic Admiral Dönitz was adamant
that a wave of new U-boats could do the damage
needed to turn the tide in the Atlantic. These
new submarines were faster, more advanced,
and were the first actual submarines deployed
by the Kriegsmarine. They didn’t have to
surface at all thanks to the new snorkel,
adopted from the Danish, which allowed them
to recharge their batteries underwater. In
the older designs, the U-boats had to surface
to let the exhaust fumes out as their engines
recharged the batteries - so they were technically
just boats. And with these new submarines,
they could potentially do a lot of damage
to the Western Allies.
Hitler liked Dönitz’ optimism, which explains
why he favoured him at this stage. Heinz Guderian
also remained optimistic of victory, which
is why he becomes Chief of the General Staff
of the Army in mid-1944 - replacing Zeitzler.
Hitler was trying to choose generals that
would keep fighting - those who still had
belief in victory. You can’t win a war if
you don’t believe in victory - at least,
that’s how the logic went. Guderian tries
to paint Hitler as a madman in his memoirs,
but there’s little evidence that he thought
that at the time. Guderian believed in victory
- that is why he was chosen.
Hitler also had the V-1 and V-2 rockets. Since
the Luftwaffe was no longer capable of taking
off, and German cities were being bombed,
it was time to take revenge on Britain by
firing missiles at them. The slower V-1s could
be shot down, but the Allies could do nothing
against the V-2 rocket, which came in faster
than the speed of sound and gave no warning
before impact. It was hoped that these miracle
weapons would cause a morale crisis for the
Western Allies.
This is why Hitler hoped to counterattack
the Western Allies, turn the tide, then concentrate
on the Soviets. A plan came to light in September
1944 for what would become known as the Ardennes
Offensive - an attack in much the same way
that the Germans had attacked the French and
British in 1940.
Clearly, Hitler was clutching at straws. The
fact that he was ordering his men to “stand
fast” against impossible odds, and that
he had ordered troops to create “fortress”
towns and cities - willingly allowing his
men to be surrounded and cut off by the Soviets
- have led some to conclude that Hitler’s
meddling was making the situation worse. There’s
also a question of the Führer’s mental
state - although both of these points are
certainly up for debate.
In the west, the fortress towns actually played
to the German advantage. Blocking the coast
prevented supplies reaching the western Allies
- which forced them to drive supplies by truck
over huge distances in order to keep their
armies in the field. This actually stopped
them for months. So there’s an argument
to be made for the fortress towns in the west.
But in the East, the Soviets were not reliant
on ports to supply their forces. They were
using trains, trucks and horses. Holding onto
random towns and villages in the middle of
nowhere did little to the overall logistical
situation, although it did slow them down
a little bit. Hitler’s reasoning was that
a smaller German force could tie down large
numbers of Soviet forces. This would slow
down the Red Army, giving the Germans time
to build defences, replenish their forces,
and find victory somehow. The problem of course
is that the Red Army had enough troops to
both cover the pockets and keep going. Plus,
once supplies ran out, the pocket would surrender,
and this happened pretty quickly in most cases.
So the time gained was little, and the manpower
and resources wasted in holding the pocket
was greater than the gains. But desperate
times called for desperate measures and this
was desperate times for National Socialist
Germany.
It has been argued that this is what led to
the creation of the Courland Pocket. It was
a way of tying down huge numbers of Soviet
forces, preventing them from being used on
the dash to Berlin. But is this really the
case? We’ll come back to this question later
in the series, but it’s good to have this
idea in the back of your mind as we watch
the fighting unfold.
Either way, the German Army was resorting
to desperate tactics in order to stem the
Red Army tide. What’s interesting is that,
earlier in the war, when Kurt Zeitzler becomes
Chief of the Army General Staff in September
1942, he implemented Fundamental Order No.
1 - a policy of stripping down the number
of staff officers in the higher formations
in the army. In part, this was an effort to
become more efficient and provide experienced
staff officers for the front line units - since
they were severely lacking experienced officers.
But it also increased the pressure on what
had already been small staff sections, and
reduced the number of officers working in
intelligence or logistics, causing even more
problems at the front as a result. The German
Army of World War II was not known for its
logistical capabilities - in fact, logistics
was probably the skill it lacked the most.
So this reduction was doubly painful. And,
because of this reorganization, 16 or 17 separate
branches now reported directly to the Chief
of the General Staff, which was too much for
him to handle. By mid-1944, Zeitzler was on
his last legs as a result of the stress, as
were his staff officers.
A change had taken place in the way the army
handled officer promotion. Unlike in the early
war, where officers were promoted based on
the time they’d served in the army, the
idea now was that officers should be promoted
based on their performance at the front. This
was because there was a lack of officers in
general for the expanding army, and so rapid
promotions were necessary. Character and effectiveness was now all that mattered in order for a
soldier to become an officer. And that character was
based mainly upon National Socialist teachings.
Any officer who wanted to get ahead now had
to prove that he was a good National Socialist.
The problem was that the new officers had
little knowledge of the workings of their
new commands, and didn’t have time to learn
them before they were soon promoted again.
As the war progressed, this problem became
an epidemic within the army, with fewer and
fewer officers able to fulfil their role.
In fact, by late 1941, let alone later, officers
in the lower ranks were constantly asking
questions and giving tasks to those above.
They were new to their role and inexperienced.
They would skip ranks if needed - and this
habit was actually encouraged by the top ranks,
by people like Keitel and Hitler. As the war
progressed, and even more newer officers rose
up the ranks, this tendency got worse and
worse. The reality was that the entire staff
organization - from top to bottom - was massively
overburdened, with lower ranks going straight
to the top in order to get answers.
While Hitler did meddle in the decisions of
his officers - they wanted him too. In some
cases, they needed him too. The officer corps
simply couldn’t cope, forcing more and more
decisions to go higher and higher, until...
Hitler. And coupled with the fact that Hitler
didn’t want his men to withdraw for no reason,
this relationship ‘benefited’ both sides.
On the 19th of January 1945, Hitler ordered
that all commanders down to division level
should report any planned movement or action
to him so that he could have a say in the
decision. Sure, it looks as though Hitler
was meddling - and maybe he was - but this
order wouldn’t have been necessary if those
officers weren’t as inexperienced and overburdened
as they were.
But wait a second, why was there such a need
for officers? Wasn’t the army getting smaller
as the war progressed? Surely this would lead
to a decline in the number of required officers…
right? Up until Kursk in mid-1943, the army
was actually expanding in size, not decreasing.
This required more officers. And, while the
army started to decline in late-1943 (after
Kursk), there is something important to note.
On a whole, German divisions were getting
smaller, and there were more divisions. This
meant that there were more individual units
overall (like battalions). Now the battalions
required less men per unit, but still need
the same amount of staff officers overall
to run them. So there were more weaker battalions,
more weaker regiments, more weaker divisions
- requiring less manpower overall - but needing
more staff. Needing more officers. And Germany
was out of officers.
Now this might seem contradictory at first,
but in theory, smaller divisions are actually
better and more mobile than larger - bulkier
divisions. Smaller divisions are more flexible
- which is great for a mobile Blitzkrieg or
Bewegungskrieg war of movement. The Italians
realised this before the war, deciding to
create binary divisions - divisions with just
two infantry regiments rather than three.
Unfortunately, while this is perhaps correct,
it requires more officers to fill those ranks.
The Italians didn’t have enough good officers
(and few trucks to make these smaller divisions
faster), which is why they struggled against
the British. And as the war progressed, the
Germans were trying to create more smaller
or binary divisions. By 1944, the German divisions
were operating in divisional groups, often
the size of regiments. Perhaps this was down
to the lack of officers? Yes they had a large
number of experienced officers within the
officer corps, but they also had a much larger
number of inexperienced officers as well.
Part of the reason that the Germans could
reduce the size of their divisions was because
Soviet divisions were smaller than theirs.
The Red Army actually had this problem throughout
the war - smaller divisions, but requiring
more officers. This was why they got rid of
the corps-level of command in the early-war
period and only put it back in later. This
reduced the number of officers at corps level,
freeing them up to go to the bottom level.
But of course, this led to organizational
problems, which is why, in the early war period,
the Soviets were less flexible in their operations.
The Red Army by 1944 though had large numbers
of experienced staff officers, and the corps
level was reintroduced. Their army - while
still far from perfect - was far more organized
and efficient than it had been in the early
part of the war.
By 1944, most Soviet Rifle Divisions had an
effective strength of just 2,000 men or less.
This was very very small - since divisions
in the early-war had been over 10,000 men
strong. Though they were severely battered,
the German divisions still outnumbered the
Soviet divisions in terms of manpower. So
when you hear of ten Soviet divisions going
up against two German divisions - actually
they don’t outnumber them five to one - as
the number of divisions suggests - but perhaps
two or three to one. Still outnumbered, but
not by the “waves” of troops as often
described in the German books. For example,
at one point 1st Shock Army sends 13 divisions
vs three German divisions. But if we do some
rough math, 2,000 men times 13 equals only
26,000 men. The reality was that the German
divisions at this stage had somewhere in the
region of five to seven thousand men each,
which puts the number roughly between fifteen-thousand and twenty-one-thousand. So certainly
outnumbered, but not by three or four to one as the division numbers alone suggests.
This principle applies to many of the Soviet
units. During the Courland Pocket, the Germans
have two armies, but tie down six Soviet armies.
What we see though is that both sides are
roughly equal in strength (with the Germans
in good defensive terrain), which again suggests
that the Soviets don’t outnumber them several
times over. There’s a two or three to one
advantage at times during the Summer and Autumn
Offensives, but that ratio decreases once
the Germans are trapped in Courland, since
the Soviets are racing for Berlin - not Courland.
The reason for this is the often overlooked
or ignored fact that the Soviets are also
scraping the barrel in 1944 and 1945. Their
country has been devastated by the Axis onslaught,
and National Socialist occupation - as well
as the previous failures of their own economic
policies. In 1942, approximately 62,400,000
people of the Soviet Union were under German
occupation. This left 104,600,000 to fight
against a combined Axis population of 147,800,000.
Yes, in 1942, the Soviet population was outnumbered
by their enemy. They had to strip the Soviet
economy to incredibly thin levels just to
find the manpower to recruit for the army.
In 1945, collective farms were operating at
just 71% of their 1941 work staff. And the
percentage of women working in these farms
had increased from 56% in 1940 to 73% in 1943.
Similar numbers applied to the Gulags - which
were providing substantial raw materials for
the Soviet war effort. It’s only really
in mid-1944 that this lost-portion of the
Soviet population comes back under Soviet
control, but even then they’re desperate
for manpower. This is why they force local
Latvians, Estonians and Lithuanians into their
ranks - they’re short on manpower.
That said, in the July of 1943, the Soviets
as a whole have 6.7 million men in arms, while
the Axis have 4 million. Approximately, a
ratio of 2 to 1 of Soviets vs the Germans
alone. But by the May of 1944, the Soviets
have 6,750,000 men on the Axis-Soviet Front,
while the Axis have 3,313,000 (of which 2,520,000
are German). On a whole, German forces are
outnumbered two or three to one, while total
Axis are outnumbered two to one. But by the
time we get to November 1944, when the Courland
Pocket is formed, Axis forces are reduced
to 2,200,000, while the Soviets increase their
numbers (mainly due to an influx of 700,000
allies troops) to 7,200,000. Now the Axis
are outnumbered roughly 3.5 to one. Clearly,
as a result of the successful Soviet Summer
offensive - Operation Bagration - the Germans
are in trouble by this point.
But it’s worth noting that in 1944 and 1945
the bulk of the Soviet manpower is aimed at
the central and southern fronts, not in the
north - which is where we’ll be focusing.
Therefore it’s probably best to imagine
a rough manpower ratio of about two to one
facing Army Group North, although that certainly
fluctuates. But the point I want to emphasize
is that counting the number of divisions is
not the best way to judge by how much the
Germans are outnumbered, and in order to discourage
this, I’m going to reduce the size of the
Soviet unit cards in this series compared
to the Germans to give you a more accurate
reflection of the strength of their units.
Either way, we can clearly see that by 1944
the German Wehrmacht was in serious decline.
Post-Kursk reserves of manpower were at critically
low levels, and frontline infantry divisions
were forced to fight in kampfgruppen (battle
groups) at the strength of regiments. Material
equipment was in decline too. Typically, only
a third of German anti-tank units had tank
destroyers or high-calibre guns, and tanks
became a scarce commodity.
In contrast, by 1944, the Red Army had transformed
from it’s early-war shell into a veteran
well-oiled machine. And it was using Blitzkrieg
(or, to be accurate, Deep Operation Doctrine,
which was similar) which it could only do
because half the trucks in the Red Army were
provided by Lend Lease.
“These trucks solved one of the Red Army’s
greatest deficiencies: the inability to resupply
and sustain mobile forces once they had penetrated
into German rear areas. Without the trucks,
each Soviet offensive from 1943 to 1945 would
have come to a halt after a shallower penetration,
allowing the Germans time to reconstruct their
defenses and forcing the Red Army to mount
yet another deliberate breakthrough attack.”
The Soviets were less thrilled by other Lend
Lease equipment, such as tanks and planes
- although 63.5% of the Soviet air defence
force throughout the war ended up being stocked
by western fighters. But it was clear that
by 1943 onwards, the shortchanged Soviet formations
of the early war were now receiving significantly
more equipment, in terms of tanks, anti-tank
guns, radios, trucks and plentiful numbers
of artillery pieces. Soviet rifle armies were
now combined-arms armies. And after 1943,
Tank Armies were being used to strike into
the rear of the German lines up to 500 kilometers
in depth. These new formations had one or
two tank and one mechanized corps, and a separate
tank brigade or regiment, plus various motorcycle
reconnaissance, anti-tank, anti-aircraft,
artillery, rocket-launcher, signals, maintenance,
and transportation units. This was no longer
the early days of the war - the Red Army dominated
the battlefield.
To counter these Tank Armies, the Germans
created Heavy Panzer BATTALIONS? Yes, battalions.
The Germans would use battalions and panzer
divisions to counter Soviet Tank Armies. On
a whole, Panzer 4s and Panthers were employed
in the regular panzer divisions, while the
Tigers were used in heavy tank battalions.
StuGs were employed in their own Sturmgeschütz
Battalions as well.
The original concept of the heavy tank battalions
was that they would be used on the offensive
to break through the enemy’s tactical defensive
lines. But, the tide of war had turned, so
the heavy tank battalions were often employed
on the defensive, or as a counter-attacking
force, against the Soviet Tank Armies. In
these roles, they were generally quite effective
on the tactical level, and could destroy large
numbers of enemy vehicles.
However, there were problems. Due to shortages,
there was a lack of infantry, artillery, minesweepers
and armoured recovery vehicles to support
them. And since lone tanks are vulnerable
to enemy infantry, mines and anti-tank guns
etc, this resulted in heavy tank casualties
and rendered the heavy tank battalions less
effective than they could have otherwise have
been. Production costs were also high. Few
tanks reached the front, and those that did
were deployed in small numbers. They also
had massive mechanical reliability issues,
were a logistical nightmare, and had a short
radius of action. So while they may have earned
some tactical victories, they made very little
impact on the operational or strategic levels.
Worse, the Soviets simply countered them with
heavy guns, or bypassed the heavy tank battalions
entirely to strike off into the rear of the
German lines. Overall, while they seem impressive,
they really weren’t that effective at stopping
the enemy.
Now what’s interesting is that the Germans
did actually have a reasonable number of spare
tanks at this stage. The problem was that
many of them were awaiting repair, and they
didn’t have the spare parts to actually
fix them. In the June of 1944, 17% of all
the panzers that Army Group Centre had, were
out of action because they needed repair.
While I don’t have the numbers for Army
Group North, it’s reasonable to assume that
they had similar percentages of armoured vehicles
out of action due to mechanical issues.
And those tanks that they did have suffered
heavily from a chronic lack of fuel brought
about by Germany’s failure to capture the
Caucasus oil fields in 1942, not helped by
the Allied bombing campaign against the Oil
Refineries in Germany during mid-1944. The
same applies to the Luftwaffe. By mid-to-late
1944, the Luftwaffe was effectively grounded
by a lack of fuel and spare parts. Those that
did continue were concentrated in the Reich
itself in order to try offset Western Allied
bombers. This is where 75% of all 88mm Flak
guns ended up - the Reich - to try stem the
tide in the air. Now front line units found
themselves without air-power; something they’d
relied upon quite heavily in the early-war
period, and with less air or anti-tank protection
due to the recall of 88mm guns. Effectively,
the same problems that had plagued the Red
Army in the early war period now plagued the
German Army. And just like the early-war Red
Army, the Germans didn’t have the capability
to resist.
Perhaps this explains why Germany was relying
on heavy tanks to take on the enemy tanks.
It seems that the Germans were trying to make
up for the lack of 88mm guns in their anti-tank
gun forces by mounting those guns on the heavier
tanks. Was this a good solution to the problem
though?
If we consider that in 1942, T-34s made up
51% of all Soviet tank production, and that
by 1943 to 44, the percentage had increased
to 79%. Most tanks that the Germans would
face in this period would be T-34s of various
models. T-34-85s outgunned and out-armoured
the Panzer IVs, but they were in trouble when
faced with a Panther, Tiger or Tiger II. The
Tiger I’s could be defeated if the T-34s
got within 500 yards - which would be lucky
since the Tigers’ 88mm gun could defeat
them from thousands of yards away. Similarly,
a Panther could knock out a T-34-85 from the
front at 1200 meters away, while the Panther
or Tiger II’s sloped frontal armour were
(with an exception of a lucky hit on the flat
turret face of the Panther) impossible to
defeat from the front using a T-34. Only heavy
122mm guns on vehicles such as the SU-100
tank destroyer could hope to penetrate a Panther
or Tiger II from the front.
But, of course, the weaker side and rear armour
of the German tanks could be taken out at
long ranges. So, the German advantage in heavy-armour
and firepower was much like the German tank
advantages in the early war. The Germans tried
to destroy Soviet tanks at a distance before
they got close enough to take them on, and
the Soviets tried to outflank and get close
to the German panzers. But we know that the
Courland Pocket prevented any major outflanking
maneuver, and because of the marshes and forests
in the area, the Soviets were funnelled into
killing zones, which naturally favoured the
armour and firepower of the German tanks.
Prior to this point though, the open spaces
favoured the Soviets, since it allowed them
to get around the sides of the German tanks.
This helps explain why the fighting flowed
prior to, and then became a stalemate in,
the Courland Pocket.
However, there’s something we need to note.
Using tanks to take on tanks is not the purpose
of a tank. An anti-tank gun can take out a
tank just as well as a tank, and can be hidden
easily, and are easier to produce. If one
gets taken out, it’s no big deal because
they’re cheap to make. Tanks on the other
hand are expensive to make. Losing one of
them costs you a ton of precious resources.
In the period of 1942 to 1944, the Germans
only built 1,350 Tiger I’s. In 1943 alone,
the Soviet Union produced 1,300 heavy self-propelled
guns (SUs with 152mm guns), plus 800 medium
self-propelled guns with 122mm guns, and 2,300
light self-propelled guns with 76mm or smaller
guns. The heavy 152mm and 122mm guns would
have no problem tackling a Tiger tank. And
we’ve not even talked about the production
of the T-34, which dwarfed all German tank
production of the entire war combined. So
while armour can help, there’s always a
bigger gun, and losing an expensive tank to
cheaper weapons really doesn’t justify the
cost.
In the early war, the Germans had used a combination
of anti-tank guns, mines, anti-tank rifles,
Stukas, explosives, and tanks to overwhelm
the lone enemy tanks that wandered into range.
This was combined arms warfare. The Germans
had learnt this lesson in the early war period
- yet seemed to have forgotten this by 1944.
Now they were using tanks to take on enemy
tanks directly, which, while that is fine,
it’s simply not efficient. Sure, they had
replaced anti-tank rifles with panzerfausts
and panzerschrecks, which were more capable,
even if the user had to get pretty close to
the target tank in order to use the weapon.
But the idea of using tanks to take out enemy
tanks is the main issue. While your tank is
doing that, it’s not riding off encircling
units and destroying the enemy’s rear areas.
You’ve abandoned the idea of the war of
movement (Bewegungskrieg), and have replaced
this with the war of position (Stellungskrieg).
Let’s sit there and lob shells at each other
until one side wins. It’s now a war of attrition
- a war that Germany cannot hope to win.
Perhaps this was all a result of the oil crisis.
The fuel costs of driving off into the sunrise
are massive. But having a tank sit there and
fire its gun doesn’t cost so much. Perhaps
it was a necessity for the Germans. Either
way, the initiative had been lost by the Axis,
and gained by the Soviets. Overall, it’s
hard to escape the conclusion that the German
Army was on its last legs - making it’s
last stand. And while the Soviet Red Army
was also scraping the barrel, it was armed
and ready for the fight to Berlin... stopping
to recapture the Baltic States on the way.
Next episode, we’ll take a look at the Baltic
States themselves, and see what fate befell
them during this war. That will put the whole
thing into context, prior to the fighting
itself. Thank you to my Patrons, you made
this series possible, because you’re awesome.
Please consider supporting me so that I can
create the best historical documentaries ever
- links in the description. Thanks for watching,
and supporting, bye for now.